			      James J. Menard
                           Fairfield, Connecticut
         e: jim@jimmenard.com, h: (203) 254-2755, c: (646) 206-4054


EXPERIENCE:

Senior Software Engineer                      Infinite Reality, 2021 - Present

Principal Software Engineer                          Warby Parker, 2018 - 2021

    As the Retail  and Vision Services team's  Principal Engineer, responsible
    for  inter- and  intra-team technical  design review  and decisions,  code
    quality   and  maintainability,   technical   mentorship,  and   developer
    onboarding. Organized team architecture and technical discussions and gave
    multiple  talks on  various  technologies. Lead  team  in increasing  test
    coverage, PR  review process improvements, and  increased monitoring. Lead
    consulting team  in implementation of  card present tap-to-pay  for retail
    locations. As a  member of the Architecture Council, lead  creation of API
    framework  design  practices  and discussed  technology  organization-wide
    practices  and policies.  Earlier as  an SRE  Principal Engineer,  rewrote
    retail  print  queue  management  services and  installation  scripts  and
    implemented an AWS EC2 image management process.


Principal Engineer                                 Chloe + Isabel, 2015 - 2018
    
    Work with  the technology team  to improve platform  quality, reliability,
    scalability, and responsiveness. Lead  the e-commerce platform's financial
    and operations  systems team including inventory,  order taking, promotion
    application, shipping and tax  calculation, payment, shipping fulfillment,
    and  commission  calculation  and  payment.  Work  closely  with  Product,
    Operations, and  QA to set priorities  and milestones. As part  of ongoing
    work  to  improve site  reliability  and  scalability, found  bottlenecks,
    improved  performance of  code  and database  queries,  and upgraded  tech
    platform.   The  team   implemented   international  shipping,   automated
    merchandiser payment, collect-on-ship, and more.

    o Added multiple warehouse support and configurable shipment pricing and
      carrier override
    o Made audit logging asynchronous, improving response times 14%
    o Integrated with forum/publishing platform
    o Managed on-call schedules and performed regular issue review with QA
    o Documented major subsystems
    o Restarted tech blog and wrote articles
    o Organized and gave internal technical talks
    o Gave code reviews and mentored all tech team members
    o Assessed potential vendors and acquisitions
    o Screened and interviewed candidates

Sr. Dir. of Engineering and Architecture, Science             AIG, 2014 - 2015
    
    Led  and grew  a  team  of developers  focused  on  rapid prototyping  and
    development  of  new  applications that  brought  evidence-based  decision
    making, innovation, and analytics (big data) to multiple business lines.

VP of Engineering                                         nRelate, 2013 - 2014

    Led, grew, and improved the technology platform and processes at a company
    that dynamically recommends and serves  four billion related article links
    and ad impressions a month  across over 100,000 sites. Created development
    life cycle, project management, and  QA processes for software development
    and  operations  teams.  Removed  operational single  points  of  failure.
    Improved  system uptime,  reliability, and  fault tolerance.  Led R&D  and
    architectural  redesign   and  replacement  of  core   systems  with  more
    appropriate,   scalable  technologies.   Lead  data   center  and   server
    infrastructure redesign and migration.

Principal Engineer                               General Assembly, 2012 - 2013

    Senior member of development team.  Prototyped and implemented new systems
    and  researched  technologies.  Created  CMS  and  implemented  e-commerce
    financial systems.

Director of Technology                                     ideeli, 2011 - 2012

    Provided  technical guidance,  R&D, support,  and mentorship  for ideeli's
    core  technology  platform  and  the team.  Technical  lead  for  multiple
    projects including development of A/B testing framework and replacement of
    credit  card  vendor. Created  prototype  rules  engine implementation  of
    personalization engine. Acted as mentor for developers by teaching courses
    and reviewing code.

Brain AI/Rules Lead                Kaplan Test Prep and Admissions 2009 - 2011

    Led  and managed  team responsible  for building  technology  platform for
    taxonomy-based  modeling   of  student  knowledge   and  customized  study
    recommendation,  using business  rules engine,  custom code,  and AI-based
    algorithms. Designed  and deployed beta version  of software; subsequently
    built and led team delivering scalable technology platform that will serve
    as basis for future Kaplan  products. Acted as liaison with business users
    and subject matter  experts, managing frequently-changing requirements and
    product  goals. Oversaw  selection of  rules engine  vendor and  design of
    technology   platform.   Managed    internal,   vendor,   and   consultant
    deliverables.

Consultant                                                    Independent 2009

    Completely  redesigned, rebuilt,  and deployed  the back  end  and content
    management of the Web site of  a well-know Nickelodeon kid's TV show along
    with its  content management and user-generated  content workflow systems.
    The site has over 4 million registered users, serves over 270 terabytes of
    data monthly, and  is available in 18 languages.  Responsible for choosing
    the technology  and designing, implementing, and  delivering the software.
    The site runs on Amazon's EC2 and uses Ruby on Rails.

Ruby and Rails Implementation Engineer	                    10gen, 2008 - 2009

    Implemented  Ruby  language and  framework  support  for  the 10gen  cloud
    computing platform using JRuby,  Java, and server-side JavaScript. Created
    database and runtime  environment adapters in Java and  Ruby to allow Ruby
    on Rails and other Ruby frameworks  to use the Babble app server and Mongo
    schema-free distributed database. Implemented the ability for Ruby code to
    call and  be called  by code  in other languages.  Developed a  Ruby Mongo
    Object/Relational Mapper  (ORM) framework, an  ActiveRecord Mongo adapter,
    CGI session and logging database storage, a grid file storage wrapper, and
    more. Wrote a  pure-Ruby Mongo driver and Ruby and  Clojure examples for a
    Java driver.  Enhanced Babble app  server and JavaScript  libraries. Wrote
    extensive unit tests. Presented talks at conferences and user groups.

Senior Director of Technology                            iAmplify, 2006 - 2008

    Assumed leadership of  tech team when VP of  Engineering left the company.
    Designed, implemented, documented, and  deployed new and improved features
    for  company's core software  platform, public  and private  Web services,
    financial  and  sales   reports,  software  deployment  tools,  e-commerce
    enhancements, video  feeds, branded Web  sites, and more.  Redesigned core
    technology  platform and  implemented core  subsystems. Helped  select new
    production  hosting facility  and planned  and led  production  server and
    software  transfer.  Led   e-commerce  vendor  selection.  Introduced  new
    technologies  such as  Subversion,  Ruby,  and Rails  to  team. Fixed  MP3
    encoding  problems and  many  other  technical issues.  Acted  as DBA  and
    sysadmin. Met  with potential clients and partners  as company's technical
    representative.  Performed R&D.  Took part  in VC  due  diligence process.

Open Source Project Leader                       Active Endpoints, 2004 - 2005

    Project leader  and community advocate  for ActiveBPEL's open  source BPEL
    engine. Liaison  between Active Endpoints  and the open  source community.
    Managed  developer relations, code  releases, and  Web site.  Created code
    samples  and  tutorials.  Taught  BPEL  Essentials  course.  Created  BPEL
    certification exam. Provided developer support.

Consultant                                            Independent, 2001 - 2005

    o Redesigned   and   implemented   Preclick's   PhotoWiki.   Designed  and
      implemented  the Instant  Photo Messaging  server and  prototype client.
      Member of Preclick Technical Advisory Board.

    o For Expert Foods, added Amazon interface, bug tracking system, and
      source code control.

    o For Warner Music Group, selected and installed an Open Source guaranteed
      file delivery mechanism and worked on design of an E-commerce system.

    o For Variagenics, added features to genetics sample tracking system.

    o For Sotheby's, helped rebuild mainframe apps in Java.

    o For 3Path, selected and installed an Open Source reporting system.

    o For the Information and Content Exchange (ICE) Authoring Group,
      developed two Open Source ICE reference implementations.

    o As an independent, developed multiple Open Source projects and published
      "Building Applications With Berkeley  DB Java Edition" and "Introduction
      to Ruby for Mac OS X".

Chief Technology Officer                Strategic Legal Resources, 2000 - 2001

    Founding member  of startup executive  team tasked with  technical vision,
    prototype,  implementation, and  delivery of  a B2C  Web  service. Through
    mergers and  acquisitions, took responsibility for  infrastructure of $20M
    company.  Enabled   expansion  from  three  offices   to  six.  Evaluated,
    integrated,  consolidated, and replaced  disparate front-  and back-office
    systems. Created  new VPN, email, and financial  systems. Managed desktop,
    server, and Web site support.

Vice President, Application Engineering                 Sotheby's, 1999 - 2000

    Designed and implemented SOTHEBYS.COM  b2b and b2c E-commerce auction site
    subsystems.  Coordinated   internal  and  contract   technical  resources.
    Increased site  performance tenfold. Worked with business  users to derive
    and simplify  business and auction  rules. Evaluated new  technologies and
    developed prototypes. Acted as mentor to technology team.

Director of Technology                      New Media Productions, 1998 - 1999

    Managed, directed, and grew  the technology department. Designed reference
    and framework architectures. Prepared  and presented technical designs and
    work estimates. Introduced structured design and development practices.

Associate Director                  Cambridge Technology Partners, 1996 - 1998

Project Leader, Macintosh Development
                                 MCI/News Corp. Internet Ventures, 1995 - 1996

Software Engineer                                  Bolt Beranek & Newman, 1995

Associate                                       Marble Associates, 1993 - 1994

Senior Software Project Engineer                Xerox Corporation, 1988 - 1992

Systems Analyst/Programmer and Administrator
                           Strong Memorial Hospital Cancer Center, 1983 - 1988


PUBLICATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS:

    "Ruby in the Clouds", presented at RubyConf 2008.

    "Ruby on Rails - An Introduction", online, presented to NY CTO Club,
    July 2006.

    "Building Applications With Berkeley DB Java Edition", Java Developer's
    Journal, September 2004.

    "Unit Testing With OCUnit", O'Reilly's MacDevCenter, April 2004.

    "Alternate Data Storage Technologies", online, presented to NY CTO Club,
    April 2004.

    "Introduction to Ruby for Mac OS X", MacTech, March 2003 cover article.

    "Ruby, an Introduction", online, presented to NY CTO Club, July 2001.


TECHNICAL SKILLS:

Languages
    Ruby, Python, Java, Scala, PHP, JavaScript, Bash, Lisp, Smalltalk,
      Objective-C, Perl, C, C++, Assembly
    Acquainted with: Clojure, Elixir, Erlang, Go, Haskell, Fortran, Pascal

Operating Systems
    Unix (Linux, BSD, Solaris, etc.), Mac OS X, MacOS, Nextstep, BeOS, DOS,
    Windows, VMS

Databases
    MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, MongoDB, Sybase, Informix

Frameworks and Tools
    JRuby, Ruby on Rails, Sinatra, J2EE, Spring, Hibernate, Tapestry,
    Cayenne, JSP, Servlets, JDBC, Ant, Maven, JUnit/XUnit, RMI, CORBA,
    (X)HTML, CSS, AJAX, XML, XML-RPC, SOAP, WSDL, BPEL, ICE, Apache, Tomcat,
    WebLogic, Prevayler, LaTeX, Yaws, Erlyweb, more


EDUCATION:

University of Rochester, Bachelor of Arts - May, 1983
    Major: Mathematics, with a concentration in Computer Science
				       

PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS:

New York CTO Club
Connecticut CTO Club


INDEPENDENT PROJECTS:

PatchMaster: MIDI processing and patching system
DataVision: Cross-platform graphical database reporting tool
NQXML: XML parser written in Ruby
Rice: Information and Content Exchange (ICE) protocol reference
      implementation in Ruby
TwICE: ICE protocol reference implementation in Java
midilib: Pure-Ruby MIDI file and event manipulation library
Bangkok: Ruby chess game replayer with music generation capability
KeyMaster: Real-time MIDI performance software
Squeak (Smalltalk) PostgreSQL interface
